.\" This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
.\" License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
.\" file, You can obtain one at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016-2020 David Jackson
.Dd July 7, 2016
.Dt CYTOGEN 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm cytogen 
.Nd fast and simple static-site generator
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Cytogen is a program you can use to create static websites from a series
of templates and contents files. It is designed to be simple to use, fast, and
obvious (i.e. it doesn't do anything you didn't tell it to do). You interact
with Cytogen via the
.Sy cyto
command. See the associated man page for more information on how it works.
.Sh PROJECT SETUP
Inside a Cytogen project directory, all files are assumed to be intended to
be rendered to the static site. Your main directory should have an index.html
file in it as the main entry point to your site. Apart from some special
directories (all of which begin with an underscore "_"), everything in the
directory should be organized in the same hierarchy as you'd like to use in
the finalized site. If you want to keep things in your project that you don't
want to appear in your generated side, put them in a folder whose name begins
with an an underscore "_". Just be sure that the folder name doesn't collide
with one of the special folders.
.Ss LAYOUTS
Most of the pages on your site will share common elements (e.g. the <html>
tags, the navigation menu, etc) and layouts mean you only have to write these
bits once. The layouts files go in the special
.Sy _layouts
directory. Layout files are
.Sy ctache
templated HTML files. They must all contain a 
.Sy {{>content}}
partial which is where the main content of the page will be rendered. Here is
a very simple example in a file called
.Qq default.html
.Bd -literal
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
    <head>
        <meta charset="utf-8">
        <title>Example</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1>Example</h1>
        {{>content}}
    </body>
</html>
.Ed
You can use your layouts by specifying a
.Qq layout
in your actual file's cytogen-header.
.Ss FILE HEADERS
To include dynamic information in your files, add a cytogen header to the
top of the file. The cytogen header are lines delineated by "---". For
example, to put some content in the layout above:
.Bd -literal
---
layout: default
name: Test Testerson
---
<div id="content">
    <p>Hello {{name}}!</p>
</div>
.Ed
.Pp
The full list of understood header keys is as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It author
The author of the page/post
.It date
The date on which the page/post was originally written
.It edited
The date on which the page/post was most-recently edited
.It layout
The name of the layout to use for the page/post; the same as the file name of
the layout in the _layouts directory except without the file extension
.It title
The title of the page/post
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cyto 1
.Xr ctache 1
